blog: console dev diary 1 (#608)
tokio-rs/website: content/blog/2021-09-console-dev-diary-1.md

---
date: "2021-09-08"
title: "Console Dev Diary #1"
description: "September 8, 2021"
---

Since the start of a Tokio Console [prototype][] a few months ago, we've been hard at work turning
it into an awesome async task debugger. We wanted to provide some concentrated updates around how
it's been progressing.

## What's the Console?

> wow! whoa! it's like `top(1)` for tasks!

The [Console][repo] is a Rust async debugging tool. The goal is to make _the_ tool you reach for
when trying to better understand how your async tasks are behaving. It makes use of `tracing` events
and spans, and thus is aimed at being runtime-agnostic.

## Updates

**Easy `init` and `Builder`:** We made it way easier to add instrumentation to your app. For most,
simply adding `console_subscriber::init()` to the top of your `main` function is enough! It will use

> sensible defaults, checking some environment variables for customization. and build an isolated

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sensible defaults, checking some environment variables for customization and build an isolated
```

Extra period.

integrating with existing `tracing` or runtimes.

![task list screenshot](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2796466/129774465-7bd2ad2f-f1a3-4830-a8fa-f72667028fa1.png)

**Everything is prettier!** The main list view looks a lot better. We made task "names" a
first-class thing, getting their own column in the list. Task IDs were made prettier and more
consistent with what a user would expect. There's better better color and UTF-8 usage, which by
default checks what the terminal supports. For example, fields displaying durations use a subtlely
different color for different magnitudes (nanoseconds vs milliseconds vs seconds).

![task details screenshot](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2796466/129774524-288c967b-6066-4f98-973d-099b3e6a2c55.png)

**You can select a task to see a "Task Details" view.** This includes more details and metrics about
that task. There's a graphed histogram of all the poll times for the task, letting you see how long
your tasks take to do work before yielding. There's also information about how many times a task has
been woken, which you can compare with the number of times polled, as well as time since the last
wake call.

> **Temporality:** After some user inteviews, we prioritized some "time control" features for the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Temporality:** After talking with users, we prioritized some "time control" features for the
```

I'd say ^^
